[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You're born into the world.
As a child, you have no control
over your outer environment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You don't get to
pick your parents.
You certainly don't get
to pick your siblings.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So you're born into
this environment.
And pretty quickly, the giants
in your world, the adults,
look at you and say, all
right, little boy, now we
want you to put this
thing on or else.
And they hand you this mask.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And the mask for boys will
say, strong silent type.
For women, it will be
the good girl-- typically
some forms of the good girl.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You'll learn pretty quickly
that this mask comes with it
a set of expectations around
your behavior, around things
you'll say, around things you're
allowed to think and not think,
and the consequences for when
you take it off and speak
your mind as a child.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Touching things that you're
not supposed to touch,
saying things, being
curious about things
that you're not supposed
to be curious about.
What you realize as a
young person is that when
you start to see that mask
off, justice is swift.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The mask then comes
with its own penal code.
If you take it off, here are
the escalating levels of voltage
that will be applied
to you to get you
to put the damn thing back on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As a child, if nobody pulls
you aside to explain all this,
kids are not stupid.
They can connect the
dots and do the math.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For most kids who are
thinking about it, which
is pretty much all kids,
they will conclude, and not
unreasonably so, that
if I take this mask off,
I will lose love.
I will not be worthy of love.
I will not be a good person,
and the message for many people
is, you won't deserve love.
Which means, don't expect
love from anyone around you,
but also, if you intrinsically
don't deserve love,
you shouldn't even
love yourself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The issue that often happens
is that because you're being
asked to put this mask on--
if you're my child, I may
enforce it pretty strictly, but
because I want to protect you.
I don't want you to get
beaten up in the schoolyard
after school.
I don't want you
to be ostracized.
I want you to have prestige
and money and all the things
you want in this world, and
that requires the participation
and cooperation and even
adulation of people around you.
And you need to put a
certain kind of mask on.
But where the wound comes
in then is where, as a kid,
you're like, every time
I take this thing off,
I get cattle-prodded, hard.
So it must mean that they
want me to put this on.
Unbeknownst to the
little six-year-old
or the parents around
him could be perfectly
willing to die for them, take
a bullet for them, or whatever,
but you don't know that as
a kid because you've never
held your own little
newborn in your arm.
So for you as a kid,
you're like, well,
it feels like I'm
losing love when
I don't get to have dessert,
when I get sent to my room,
when I get like
physically punished,
it feels like I'm
not with loved.
So in the absence of an elder
pulling them aside to say,
look, your loved without
condition, period.
We would all-- any of us
here would die for you.
But for most people, they
don't pull their kids aside
to explain that because it
was never explained to them.
They're still running
for their lives,
thinking I need to sort of
make my revenue this quarter
or I will not deserve love
even from my own self.
That's a great motivator.
It's great for earnings.
It's great for
your bank account.
It's great for a lot of things.
And it's not that I am
against any economic growth
and thriving or
whatever, but it's just
a question of the cost.
To have that sort of
fear hanging over you
and have that be the reason you
are so productive in your life,
that to me is too high a cost.
And it's not even an issue
of the practical cost.
It's the fact that it
isn't actually true.
No matter how bad your dad was,
how harsh he was, at the end
of the day, he would
give his life for you.
No normal healthy person
isn't willing at a snap
to give their life
for their child.
Whales will do that.
Mother bears will do that.
You don't even have
to be a mammal.
Chickens will do that.
And so humans are no different.
We're wired for protection
of our offspring.
And to the extent that
that fails in practice,
it's simply because a wound.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But very rare as a
child where someone
pulls them aside to
kind of like shop
talk all this through,
to say like, OK,
so there's nothing
wrong with you.
And so you keep the
mask on out of fear,
and that's where the problem
comes because you're keeping it
on based on a false
pretense, which is
that your love is conditional.
>> When you come home
at the end of the day,
what does your child
do when they see you?
And everybody in every
country around the world
says the same thing--
they run to me.
And I say, and
what did they want?
They want three things--
they want affection,
attention, and acknowledgment.
So if they're not
getting those things,
what is the one word
question every child asks?
Why?
Right.
Why can't I have a play date?
Why can't I have dessert?
Why do you have to go to work?
Why can't we stay home?
Why do I have to go to school?
Why am I getting criticized?
Why can't I live up to
my parents' expectations?
Why are my parents always
complaining about money?
And we're watching.
We're seeing these
things unveil.
When you're little,
parents are people.
Your mother is women.
Your father is men.
Or if you have same-sex parents,
that's just the way it is.
So we make these general,
sweeping statements.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So you come into the
world, you give meaning.
What does this mean?
Why are my parents struggling?
Well, I guess money is
scarce and hard to get.
Well, there they are.
They're struggling again.
Yeah.
Boy, it really looks like money
is scarce and hard to get.
And at some point, you
start believing it.
A belief is a
statement about reality
that you believe is the truth.
So that's just what a belief is.
I believe people
can't be trusted,
or I believe people
are good at heart.
Those are beliefs.
The source of the
beliefs went back
to early stages of parenting.
If children were criticized
heavily, they would conclude,
I'm not good enough.
If they weren't given love and
affection, they would conclude,
well, I guess I'm
not worth loving.
If they were ignored or
weren't given enough attention,
they would conclude,
I'm not important.
We think that we see our
beliefs in the world.
So something happens,
we get criticized,
and we give it the meaning, oh,
I guess I'm not good enough.
And then we get
criticized again,
and we go, yeah,
I'm not good enough.
And then the third time
we give it the meaning,
the meaning becomes a belief.
Now I have a belief.
When I ask this
question to people
from every country in
the world, and I say,
doesn't it seem like you
saw, I'm not good enough.
And they say,
well, I did see it.
And I say, really?
Can you see my scarf?
They say yes.
Does it have a color,
shape, and location?
Yes.
Does "I'm not good enough" have
a color, shape, and location?
No.
You can't see I'm not good--
but before we do
that they say, well,
but I saw my father
criticize me,
and I saw I didn't
get A's in school,
and I saw my mother tell
me that I would never
amount to anything, or
all the wonderful things
that sometimes people
say to children.
I saw I wasn't important.
No.
You saw your parents busy
working all the time,
not being at home, not
paying attention to you.
That's seeable, but you
cannot see a belief.
So that's how
beliefs get formed.
Now, why did they run our lives?
If you believe
that water is hot,
are you going to put
your finger in it?
If you believe, I don't
deserve good things,
are you going to ask
for what you want?
If you believe,
I'm not important,
you're going to
sit in a meeting,
and the little
voice in your head
is going to go, yeah, no,
they probably know this.
Or nobody cares what
you have to say,
and that voice comes
from your beliefs
until you don't speak up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When you were a little boy,
did you believe in Santa Claus
and the Easter Bunny?
You did, right?
And then you grew up, and you
went, oh, that's not real.
Let me have a new belief.
Oh, maybe now I
believe in hard work
again, earning my way
through the world.
So it's really about
being willing to become
an emotionally mature adult.
My parents didn't get along.
They hated each other.
The mantra I heard out of my
mother's mouth forever was,
"All men are idiots."
That was what I grew up with--
Now, I grew up to
discover that's not true.
But for the early
years of my dating,
I lived like all
men were idiots,
and then I started to
say, wait, I'm not really
having a lot of fun here.
And the truth is, that guy
graduated from Harvard Law
School.
He is not an idiot.
Maybe I need to change.
So we have to be willing to
look at our belief systems
and question them and do what
my old friend Wayne Dyer always
said--
"Don't believe every
thought that you have."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Self-esteem
comes from yourself.
It comes from
esteeming yourself.
We think our self-esteem
comes from outside of us.
So we have what we call
"survival strategy beliefs."
What makes me good enough
is being successful.
By successful, I mean
achieving things.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The self-esteem beliefs, which
I will talk about in a minute,
are here.
I'm not good enough.
Number one belief, I have
never worked with anybody
that doesn't have it.
So I'm not good enough.
What makes me good enough
is achieving things?
That's workaholism right there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The second belief,
I'm not important.
What makes me important
is being successful.
Having a lot of money,
achieving things.
So as long as I'm doing
it, this beach ball called,
"I'm not good enough, I'm not
important," stays underwater.
So it's a driven behavior.
That's why we call them
survival strategy beliefs.
So you think your self-esteem--
because this is underwater--
is now intact.
And people say to
me, oh, I don't have
the belief I'm not good enough.
I say, really?
What makes you good enough?
And if they answer anything
other than nothing,
I just am, they have a belief.
It's very elegant in
the way we look at it.
It's very simple.
So the first beliefs
are, I'm not good enough,
I'm not important,
mistakes and failures
are bad, if I make a mistake
or fail, I'll be rejected.
Those are the four
most common beliefs.
Self-esteem beliefs are, I'm
not worthy, I'm inadequate,
I'm not capable.
Let me say something
very important here--
my mother was an angel.
She was love on legs.
If you came into her space, you
got love, whether you wanted it
or not.
That's who she was.
So when I was little, she
did everything for me.
Oh, I'll do it [INAUDIBLE].
I'll do it, sweetheart.
This was, of course,
a Jewish mother.
I'll do it.
I'll do it, sweetheart.
Couldn't stand to
see me struggle.
Guess what I concluded?
I'm not capable.
So it doesn't come
from bad parenting.
You could love
your child to death
and do things that
don't serve them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One little analogy
that I use is,
a father comes down and
Johnny's about to go to school
and choose whatever college
he's about to go after.
And his father
disdains parents that
put their kids under pressure.
And he turns to Johnny
and says, Johnny, you
can do whatever you
want with your life,
and mom and myself will
be so proud of you.
Now, I was a postman and your
grandfather was a postman.
But you go do whatever
you want to do.
Johnny goes to school that
day wishing and praying
and dreaming about
being a pilot.
But actually he yearns
the love of his father
and the approval of his father,
and he's haunted by the fact
that his father has gifted
him this idea that really,
if you want me to love you
and accept you beyond measure,
you should be a postman.
But he didn't say that.
It's the unspoken expectations.
And when you delve into
that, when you were parented,
it can show you a lot of
what drives you today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Most people do
the best they can.
We all do.
Parents want the
best for their kids.
They love their kids.
But we are controlled
by these beliefs--
I hate the word when
we say we're "damaged."
See, I don't think were damaged.
I think once you get rid of the
believes, anything is possible.
We did a study with
incarcerated men
and why they do the
things that they do.
They were getting out
of prison, and then
instead of going to
rehabilitation or whatever,
they came to us, and we produced
statistically-significant
behavior changes in people who
couldn't even look at us when
we talked to them.
But they had beliefs like, if
somebody does something wrong,
they deserve to be punished,
and the way to be punished
is to be beaten, because that's
what happened to him when
he was a kid.
So he concluded-- it wasn't
just that he saw that.
He actually gave
it the meaning--
oh, I see.
When you do something wrong,
you deserve to be punished.
And the way to be
punished is to be beaten.
He didn't know anything else.
So that was a conclusion
he reached, and conclusions
live in your mind.
Once he got--
I never saw that I
deserved to be punished.
I just saw that I was punished.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> An individual's belief
determines their perception,
and then the perception
determines their experience.
So if an individual has a
belief that they are flawed,
there's something
intrinsically wrong with them,
or they're an
accident, or there's
something they did in life that
they're never going to ever
be healthy or successful
because of some past mistake,
those are debilitating beliefs.
And they will form a
perception that will ultimately
form an experience.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There are beliefs that
are holding people back.
I call it, "riding your
bicycle with the brakes on."
You're trying to go forward,
but you have this belief,
you're not good enough, you're
unworthy, you were an accident,
you're separated from life.
There's not enough
good to go around.
We live in a limited universe.
Abundance is only for a few.
We have these
limited beliefs that
then form actions that allow
us to try to manipulate
the external world
to get what we
want based on a faulty belief.
It doesn't work.
>> If in fact your beliefs
determine the outcome
of your life, what is
your job as a parent?
Every time your child walks away
from an interaction with you,
stop and ask yourself, what
did they just conclude?
And is that a belief
I want them to have
for the rest of their lives?
And if it's not, just
go back and clean it up.
Just say, I didn't
mean to yell at you.
I was just having a bad day,
or I just got frustrated.
I-- use I messages--
you didn't frustrate me.
You didn't make me anything.
I felt sad.
I felt bad.
I felt angry.
I felt disrespected.
Whatever you feel, clean it up.
Let the child know, they
are fine, you had a moment.
And that is the most
important thing.
And the second thing
is, at what cost--
at what cost must
you have your child
do what you want them to do?
At what cost to
their self-esteem,
to their ability to be free in
the world and be themselves.
Nothing is worth it.
If they're not
hurting themselves,
another, or some
thing, let it go.
>> The first rule of parenting
comes from Shelly Lefkoe.
And Shelly said, your
only job as a parent
is to keep your children safe.
That's it.
It's to keep your children safe.
To teach them how to cross
the street, to teach them
how to protect themselves.
That's your only job.
Shefali Tsabary provides
the second rule.
And the second rule is, let
your kids be who they are.
Do not impose your
beliefs on your children.
Your job as a parent is
to keep your children
free of your own bullshit.
Do not impose your
religion on your children.
Let them decide how they
will want to view God.
Do not suggest to them that they
need to conform with [? Ace ?]..
Let them decide if they
want it themselves.
Your job, according
to Shefali and
according to Shelly Lefkoe--
two of the greatest
parenting minds out there--
is to make sure that you
do not infect your children
with your beliefs.
But to let them form
their own beliefs
and to ensure that those
beliefs are healthy.
Now, one of the things we
have to recognize as parents
is that every little
thing we do is going
to cause our children to take
on some belief or the other,
just like every little
thing our parents did
imposed the belief onto us.
And that really is one
of the ultimate skills
you want to learn as a parent.
Rule number one,
keep your kids safe.
Rule number two, do not impose
your beliefs on the kid.
Rule number three, keep
your kids safe from damaging
believes that they might take
on based on your behavior.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If we could get rid of
our beliefs that have us feel
anxious, that have us feel hate,
that have us not honor other
people for whatever
they believe,
I do believe that when people
eliminate their beliefs,
they are in life differently.
They're not defensive,
they're not protective,
they're not angry.
It's a very powerful
concept, but the real way
that the world is
going to change
is if you don't hit
your child, your child
will never believe that violence
is the way to handle things.
That will stop war right there.
It's just not an option.
Our behavior is limited by
the boxes or the beliefs
that we have.
Inside the belief that violence
is a way to handle things,
there's lots of possible
actions you could take--
shoot, bomb, takeover.
But the option of conflict
resolution is outside the box
that violence is
the way to handle
things and beliefs are boxes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So if we raise a conscious
generation of children
who believe that mistakes
and failures are learning
opportunities, or that there's
no such thing as mistakes
and failures, there's
only outcomes--
you like the outcome, great.
You don't, fix it.
No judgments.
I tell parents, get
rid of four words--
right, wrong, good, bad.
Don't ever use them again.
Describe what you think,
what you feel, what you want,
what you need.
Use I messages, but
get rid of judgments,
and the world will work.
It just will.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The only thing that I have
found to work truly as a parent
is honestly allowing my kids
to see my vulnerabilities.
It is to truthfully
share where my fears lie
and not need to be
the perfect father.
And that has given me a
degree of peace to give myself
a break when I lose my temper,
or I'm short, or I'm this,
or I let myself down.
Go first.
What have you got to lose?
Say sorry.
Say, I'm wrong.
Say, I'm scared.
Say, I don't know.
The three most beautiful
words that every parent
should have every single day
in front of their children--
I don't know, son.
Allow your kids to see
your humanity so that they
begin to recognize their own.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The self negative inner
critic force will typically
come at you across
four channels,
and the four are
competence, body, identity,
and relationship.
Competence is the idea that you
should be better at something
than you actually are.
So it could be your
grades, how much money
you make, prestige, popularity,
sociability, cooking,
skill as a lover,
any of these things.
But generally, it's something
that has to do with competence.
You have some power over it.
It is a skill.
It is something you can
work on theoretically.
So that's the first one.
The second one is body,
which is this feeling
that there's something
intrinsically
wrong with your body.
That you're either too
fat or too thin, too tall
or too short, the wrong body
shape, the wrong body color,
features too big,
your nose, your ears.
It could be you're too
hairy or not hairy enough.
Basically this idea
that there's just
something wrong with
my body that, again,
makes me not worthy of love.
The third is identity,
which is the idea there
is there's something
intrinsically
wrong with something
about you as a person
that you're basically
not going to change.
So it could be your gender.
It could be your
ethnicity it could
be your religious affiliation.
It could even be
your personality.
Or it's like I'm intrinsically
kind of an introvert,
but I'm a sales guy
or an executive,
so I'm expected to play golf
and like do all these things.
So I do them
begrudgingly, but I feel
like there's something
wrong with me
because I actually
like sitting at home
and just reading a book.
The fourth is a little
bit in its own category,
and that's what I
call relationship.
And that's the
idea that you have
this core belief in your
mind that I will only
be worthy of love if blank.
I will only be lovable and
worthy of love if blank.
And this blank
conflates beautifully
with the first three.
I will only be lovable if I'm
competent, if I make money,
if I'm rich, if I'm smart,
if I get good grades, if I
score a lot of goals on the
athletic field, if I'm popular.
Or body-- I'll only be
lovable if I'm tall,
if I'm hot, if I'm skinny, if
I've got a full head of hair,
all these things.
Identity-- I'll only
be lovable if I'm not
the gender I am because boys are
more valuable than girls right.
Siblings talk about
this all the time.
If I'm a different
ethnicity, if I'm
a different religion, if I'm
a different personality type.
The poison is not from
what you put in the blank.
That's irrelevant.
The poison is in the if.
The if is what implies that
before you've done anything--
before we've turned
over any cards
to figure out what you're
actually going to do
or even what you want to
do that you as you are
with no additional
bells and whistles
are intrinsically unworthy
of love, and it's not true.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Everyone has all four.
And the trick is that
the four elements
are blended into a unique
smoothie for each person.
The mix of competence,
body, identity, relationship
is different, and the flavor
of each one is different.
So when you have one
of these smoothies,
you're sipping it all day long,
whether you like to or not.
The voice is in you.
It's like you see somebody
drive a nice car by,
and you're like oh my
gosh, I feel like an idiot.
Or you're a mom taking
your kids to school.
And this other mom
brings her kids in too.
And the hair for
her daughters are
all brushed and perfectly fine.
And then you feel like
your daughter's hair
is like a rat's nest.
And the inner voice just
starts to eat you alive.
And so when you say
these things to yourself
constantly, with the upshot--
the sort of so what being
and you're not worthy of
love-- you're less lovable.
It hurts.
And because it
hurts, It's a wound.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When you have a wound, there's
two very natural things you do.
If I'm a Roman gladiator in
the arena and we're fighting
and you cut my chest a little,
I'm going to do two things.
First thing I'm going to
do is I'm going to shield--
don't hit me again.
And the other thing is that
behind the safety of my shield,
I will try to grab something
to make the pain less.
So I will soothe.
It's not just
humans that do this.
Earthworms do this.
If I poke an earthworm, it will
start to move away from me.
So there's nothing
wrong with a person when
they show their shield,
just like there's
nothing wrong with
a person when they
have this fore
wound because they
were told to put on a mask.
There's nothing wrong with that.
There's nothing wrong
with any of this.
It's just when it
happens in a certain way,
it causes more pain
than it requires.
If you zoom in on
a shielding, there
are a couple of usual suspects.
The first is money and prestige.
Can't argue with
success, especially
here in Silicon Valley.
If I POed my company for
half a billion dollars
and now I've got a checkbook
funding all these profits,
no one is going
to poke my wound.
It's this auto drone
century mode shield,
and no one is going
to poke my wound.
As long as I know everyone
in the room knows who I am
and what I've done, which is why
people with prestige and money
will often make
sure you know that.
Perfectionism is another, where
if I'm perfect in every way--
perfect body, perfect spouse,
perfect house, perfect kids--
put together in
exactly the right way,
doing all the right activities,
the right kind of job,
the right kind of
volunteer, kids
doing the right
thing, everything,
if I'm perfect in every
way, then that is hopefully
an impenetrable shield
where no arrow of criticism
can get through.
And the issue, of course,
with perfectionism
is that it's exhausting
and it's impossible.
Third one is anger.
So if I'm angry all
the time and I've
got a scowl and people
know to walk on eggshells,
that keeps everyone
at a distance,
and that's functionally
what I want.
Because if you do come
in to swing at me,
I'm already out of range.
So that's also very effective.
But again, the cost is that
it estranges my relationships,
and I have no warmth in my life.
The last two are invisibility
and people pleasing.
So invisibility as a shield is
if I keep my head down, dress
very plainly, don't raise
my hand, speak up in class,
don't speak up in
business meetings,
maybe the bullies will
not notice me and not
pull me out to shame me or
ridicule me in some way.
And the shield of
people pleasing
is that if everyone
around me is happy--
and more importantly,
happy with me--
then perhaps the bullies
will give me a pass.
And the problem
with these last two
is that they're
not actual shields.
They don't actually
block anything.
Invisibility, you're
not blocking anything.
Unfortunately, you're not
an iguana, so I can see you.
But you're trying to
sort of evade attention.
And the problem
with people pleasing
is that it's not
a shield either.
It doesn't block.
It's appeasement.
So in the classroom,
it's the class clown.
And in real life,
it's the parent
that is like serving everybody
in the upper generation,
the in-laws, everyone
in the lower generation.
Serving the spouse,
serving the workplace,
and there's nothing left for me.
And you do this because
you feel like you
have to do this or else
you will lose love and not
be worthy of love.
So you'll give
anything for that.
So that's shielding.
It's just a menu of options.
Everyone comes up
with their own mix.
They use different
things in different--
and there's nothing
wrong with that.
If you have a wound, and
we all do, you will shield.
So what I teach
is not an exercise
in like how do we get
you to shield less.
It's like, no, no, no,
you keep that thing up.
I don't want you to get hit.
But it's more a question
of just making sure you're
getting value for money.
If I'm laying out all
this blood and treasure
to keep the shield
up, I want it to work.
And soothing is similar.
Soothing is-- the usual suspects
are alcohol and substances,
just the chemical brute
force of hitting the voice
to shut it up.
It's sex and relationships.
So sex as like the physical act,
just the narcotic act of sex.
But also relationships,
which is like the surge
of emotional validation you
get like the first two or three
weeks in any relationship.
Then after that, you kind of
see each other more clearly,
and you say ah,
and you run away.
And it's very common.
People do it all the time.
And then others on the
soothing-- texting, gaming,
shopping, gossiping, Netflix.
But the thing is not how do
we get you to not soothe.
You will soothe.
And the only question
is, how do you
want to soothe to
get the maximal pain
relief for the least cost?
When you realize this entire
range of things-- everything
from sex, drugs,
heroin, binge drinking,
all the way down to like Netflix
and stupid games on your phone,
once you realize this full
rogue's gallery of soothings
are all aimed at numbing
a single wound within you
that you as you are
intrinsically unworthy of love.
Holy cow.
If they're all aiming
at the same thing,
then that means they're
interchangeable.
Any soothing will do.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Meaning is a process
that gets rid of an emotion
in the moment.
Because if I have
a negative emotion,
I can't react powerfully
because I'm upset.
You can get rid of
meaning in the moment.
Let me give you a
parenting example.
What just happened?
My kid just mouthed off at me.
What meaning did I give it?
They don't respect me.
They mouthed off at me is here.
They don't respect me is here.
Meaning is never
inherent in the events.
Meaning is in your mind.
So if you get that the meaning
is separate from the event,
the emotion will go away.
You can also look at it and
say, what just happened?
My teenager mouthed off at me.
What meaning did I give it?
They don't respect me.
What else could it mean?
It could mean they are a
hormonal teenager having
a rough day.
Now, take it the last step.
What does it really mean that
they just spoke to me that way?
And another way of saying
that is, what do I know
for sure because that happened?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Your beliefs will determine
the meaning you give events.
So if you have the belief
I'm not good enough,
and you have a
project that fails,
you're going to give it the
meaning, oh god, I'm a failure,
I'm a loser, I'm terrible.
If you have the belief
mistakes and failures
are learning
opportunities and it's
how you grow and
your project fails,
you go, sometimes you win
and sometimes you lose
and you just build another one.
We give meaning all day long.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We all have what is
metaphorically like a board
of directors within us,
where we're the CEO,
and there are number of
characters on this board.
There's the chief
of security to make
sure you don't get
hit by a bus when
you walk out on the street.
Here's your creativity.
There's the one in
charge of making
sure you get prestige
and are not humiliated.
Your body is a board member.
Basically all the
sort of major life
forces you identify as
such are board members.
And so the way the
wounding happens then
is that when you're told
to put this mask on,
there will be parts
of you that stick out.
Because the mask is not organic.
The mask is
fashioned by society.
And in many cases, allowing
those parts of you to stick out
is punished as much as
if you took a mask off.
Because it's ruining my
suspension of disbelief.
You're a good boy.
You're an upstanding
Swiss legal expert
and that will help manage
the family, everything
in our clients, and everything.
And you can perhaps be the punk
rocker, guitar-playing artist
as a hobby on the side.
I don't want to hear
anything about it,
and certainly you cannot let
that bleed over and impinge
and degrade your
professional persona.
Very standard reading
of the riot act.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And comply with all of this
with a bow on top, or else you
will lose love.
And so the cattle prod is
hit, and we start running.
You get that cattle
prod enough times,
pretty soon an emergency meeting
of the board of directors
is called.
And the chief of security
makes an announcement and says,
look, I know we
all have our roles
and role life tenured members
of the board and everything,
but we've got a serious life or
death situation on our hands.
If our dad looks at
us like that again,
there could be real trouble.
And there is a part of our
deep biological chassis
that knows that if we
are rejected enough
and we don't comply
past a certain extreme,
we could lose our lives.
We're constantly looking out
for that threshold of like,
if we cross a certain
threshold, we're dead.
And we have to do
something about it.
And you call the emergency board
meeting, because, I'm sorry,
we're going to have to
declare martial law,
and you, punk rocker, you
guitar-playing artist,
and you long hair, you guys
are voted off the island.
Security, escort them
into the cafeteria,
sequester them until further
notice, which is like forever.
The rest of you, ignore
the banging on the door.
Carry on with the meeting.
So when these board members
within you are exiled,
it's done out of love.
It's not malicious.
It's done out of love and a
well-meaning but panicked fear.
The question basically
boils down to,
to what extent can
you get a reading
on what board
members were exiled
in order to keep your mask on.
And are you able to actually
recover them and bring them
back into the boat with you?
There's a funny thing
with these board members.
They are life tenured.
And as a board member, even
if you lock me in the closet,
my car key opens every
door in the building.
So when you lock me in
there and I stay in there,
it's because I'm complicit.
I'm the punk rocker,
guitar-playing guy in you,
and I'm like well, shit,
I better stay in here.
I don't want make--
because I love everyone too .
And so what will often happen
is that several years, sometimes
decades will go by, and
the board members who
are sitting in the
prison cell sought
to decide to take action.
They do have full access
to all the resources,
and they have access to
all the levers down there.
So they can pull
an emergency brake.
They can get you
fired from your job.
They can give you panic attacks
before you go into meetings.
They can make you wander
off with other people
to break off a relationship
that you don't want to be in.
It's like we have this compass,
and three load stones are out.
So the compass is decalibrated,
let's say, about 15%
off of True North.
And so with this
decalibrated compass,
you make all these
same decisions
because you got to
get on with your life.
Who am I going to marry, what
kind of job I'm going to take,
what kind of external persona
I'm going to wear and present
to the outside world.
You make all these choices
with a compass that
is decalibrated just about 15%.
Now 15% is about this much.
And when you deviate two or
three years out of college,
it's no big deal.
You fast forward that
another 15 to 20 years,
you're way off mark.
And at around about midlife,
you realize, holy crap,
I'm way off.
And some of us
continue, and some of us
decide to take off the mask and
take a hard left turn, which
ends up breaking a lot of shit.
So it's not a decision
to be taken lightly.
Most of us are pushed into
it kicking and screaming.
But then you start making your
way back to the original track.
And often, in hindsight,
when they're like, OK, fine.
I finally recovered the board
member, I've talked to them,
I've let them have
their day in court.
And when they give
their side of the story,
You realize that they
had a just grievance,
and they only pulled the
emergency brake very, very
begrudgingly because all the
other attempts to email you,
text you, everything
was blocked.
You marked them as spam.
You blocked them, and they just
had to continue escalating.
Because it's like, as
far as they're concerned,
as far as the entire
board is concerned,
you all parachuted in
here to find and prosecute
your meaning and purpose in
you life, for your bliss.
And whatever wound was given
to you was part of the compass.
And now you're following in
the direction of the wound
instead of letting
the wound guide you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And so, that pain you feel,
that is the lost board member
stuffed down,
banging on the door.
And that's why you need
to numb it so powerfully
and with so many
different methods.
And that's why you
need to shield it.
You can't let anyone see that.
Because if they point that
out, it's just like rips--
just pulls the wound right open.
You don't even want to
look at it yourself.
Why would you?
Not just because it's
painful, but because you've
been told in no uncertain
terms that even looking at it,
kind of looking at
it, thinking about it
will make you unworthy of love.
So it's like, if that's
what's on the table,
I will cut my own arm off
if I can, but you can't.
>> I see it all the time.
I see it all the time.
We're looking for that
external recognition.
And I'm working with clients
every single day that
have climbed that mountain, the
mountain of societal success,
financial success, and
they've climbed the mountain.
They get to the top,
they look around,
and they feel an emptiness.
And rather than stopping and
saying, what am I missing?
What am I not seeing?
What is the question
I'm avoiding?
What is the part of me that
I'm afraid the world will see,
we just come down
off the mountain,
climb another mountain,
and keep repeating
the same internal
pattern and getting
exactly the same result.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think it comes
back to self-love.
You will not look at
someone else's perfect life
with disdain or
anger or jealousy
when you feel great
about yourself.
I think the negative
comes from when
we haven't delved
into who we are
and acknowledging that it's
not the fact that their life is
perfect.
It's the fact that
you've put on a lens that
judges their perfection.
Because let's face it-- if
your life was feeling perfect
and you were in a great
place, you'd be honoring them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> People work very, very
hard to present the parts
of themselves that they
want the world to see.
And people who are
running very fast,
people who are moving
so fast, and so busy,
just afraid to stop and
to connect emotionally
with the very thing
they're avoiding.
You need to unpack your story.
You need to understand the
cost of what you went through.
So many of us said, yeah, OK,
yeah, my dad shouted at me.
Yeah, he hit me a few times.
And here's the classic--
because that was the generation.
That's what they did.
My dad had that with his father.
My father did the best he could.
And the problem
there-- and maybe
he did-- but we need to isolate
the trauma from the person.
And if you can
understand the trauma
and how it affected you away
from the individual, one is,
it allows you to
understand who you are
and how you are the way you
are today and what drives you
and what holds you back.
And secondly, it allows you
to heal the relationship that
has caused this to begin with.
It allows you to create
empathy and understanding
in terms of what that person
was going through at that time.
There's nothing, in my opinion,
more valuable, more healing--
not downloading your story,
but sharing your story.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The dichotomy of the human
spirit, the human being,
is we must endure and face
adversity and challenge
and negative thinking.
It is part of being human.
And part of that is what drives
our quest for enlightenment
or our quest for spirituality
or our quest for true love.
I believe it's a gift.
I believe in the
throes of challenge
you have to feel it to heal it.
You have to honor it.
You have to endure it.
You have to find help as
you find a way through it.
But you do have
to get through it,
or you become a victim
of circumstance.
And then it becomes
a layer and a shield
to stop love coming in.
Because you're putting
up protection barriers.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Your deepest wound is the
source of your greatest gift
to the world.
And so it's your wound that
basically throws the penny
into the deep end
of the pool for you,
then, to dive down in terms
of fulfilling and finding
your bliss.
Following your bliss is the
ultimate soothing because it
feels good minute-to-minute.
And it's also the
ultimate shielding
because you have
this goofy smile
on your face the whole time.
And you really don't care
what other people think.
>> You can use your
circumstance as a weapon,
and you can use it as an
excuse for not being the true
reflection and absolute beauty
of who you are as a human.
Or you can say, wow,
that happened to me.
What am I going to do with it?
How do I use it to
become a better person?
How can I teach
another human how
to get through the
same experience
now that I've had
to experience it?
How do I connect with
other humans that
have gone through this to
show compassion and empathy
and loyalty and understanding?
>> When you find and
follow your bliss,
you become a signpost to
other people around you.
First of all, they're inspired.
They're like, oh my
gosh, it's so amazing.
But then, hopefully,
their next reaction
is, what's so special about him?
If he could do it,
I must have a shot.
I've never seen the dice
throw of the universe end
up where a person is
born into this world
and they're given a
bliss that is completely
incompatible with life.
You were put here for a reason.
And your mission, if
you choose to accept it,
is to find that
reason and fulfill it.
In an ideal world, we
reach a tipping point
where enough people
are doing it,
where it becomes more
of this normal thing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When you share the parts
of yourself that scare you,
when you share the parts of
yourself that you're ashamed
of, when you share the parts
of yourself that you deeply
regret, when you allow the
world to see all of you,
it is the only time the
world can accept all of you.
So I would encourage people to
share the parts of themselves
that they've spent a lot
of time and energy hiding
from the world.
And watch how free you feel.
And watch what you can
do with that energy.
And then maybe, just maybe,
you can go out into the world
and inspire other
people to do the same.
And that's a world
I want to live in.
[MUSIC PLAYING]